<h2>Mobility of elites from the Electorate of Mainz</h2>

<p align="justify">- this was the topic of our seminar in the summer term of 2022 whose aim was creating our own maps on a topic of regional history. 
The theoretical starting point was recent research postulating that it would not do the <a href="https://www.britannica.com/place/Holy-Roman-Empire">Holy Roman Empire</a> justice to interpret it geographically and politically only through (traditional) political maps with clear territorial boundaries.</p> 

<p align="justify">While this criticism of traditional cartographic representations may be valid, the far more complex political-territorial nature of the empire deserves our consideration. 
The superordinate political structure, the Imperial Diet, was mirrored and further differentiated in regional assemblies of individual territories, 
imperial cities and imperial estates. The knighthood organized itself in so-called knightly circles, a separate subdivision of the imperial knighthood. 
The spiritual and temporal power of the bishops often diverged territorially. In one city, a bishop could be the supreme lord in political as well as religious matters, while he may only have been the supreme shepherd in others, not the supreme temporal lord. Some executive powers were exercised by the imperial districts, which in turn were territorially 
divided according to their own organizational principles. In jurisdiction, the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aulic_Council">Reichshofrat</a> and the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reichskammergericht">Reichskammergericht</a> competed at the highest level, and religious decisions 
on the imperial level could only be made in accordance with the two confessional corpora to which the subjects could 
appeal from 1653 onward.</p>

<p align="justify">In practice, all this led to an interplay of various political-geographical variables. <em>Example:</em> If Lutheran peasants complained about the policies of the Catholic sovereign, e.g. if the latter was oppressing their faith, they could appeal to the <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/291248351_Corpus_Evangelicorum_and_Corpus_Catholicorum_The_perception_of_corporate_politics_in_the_Holy_Roman_Empire_in_early_modern_juridical_dissertations">Corpus Evangelicorum</a> (often referred to as <em>Protestant league</em> or <em>body of Evangelicals</em> in anglophone works) for a remedy to the injustice. A local dispute of subjects with their sovereign could thus involve the highest religious-political authority on the imperial level, or in other words: everything was connected with everything else. Breaking up the analytical rigidity of fixed geographic boundaries is also linked with a second theoretical concept: <strong>mobility</strong>. It is especially true for elites that they did not only move within the boundaries of a single territory, but that they had a high degree of mobility to study, to act, to hold an office, etc., and their life stories show how much they moved between boundaries and structures.
One example of this trans-regional mobility are the careers of the cathedral provosts of Mainz, on whom the seminar focused because of the comparatively favourable availability of sources and research literature.</p> 

<p align="justify">Important stations in the lives of <a href="https://ieg-dhr.github.io/DigiKAR_Projektseminar/information_EN.html">14 noblemen</a> who held the office of cathedral provost in Mainz between 1652 and 1827 were examined in detail. 
The criterion for recording a life event was that it had to have a lasting influence on the person's professional development. Biographic events that we considered important therefore include university studies, cavalier tours, 
elevations to the cathedral chapters, as well as secular and ecclesiastical offices held over time. Ecclesiastical offices played a special role in our analysis since many of the persons studied became 
members not only of the Mainz cathedral chapter, but also of many other cathedral chapters across the Holy Roman Empire. Offices in the chapters included roles as cathedral cantors, cathedral scholasters, cathedral deans, etc.; 
some clerics analysed even rose to the office of bishop. Because of this focus on ecclesiastical offices, the exact dates of the beginning and end of the individual activities were recorded; for most secular offices or studies, the length of the activity was taken into account, each of which was recorded as an event with a 
  <code>start</code> and <code>end</code> date. Overall, the central biographic events in the lives of the cathedral provosts show that they not only moved within the boundaries of the Mainz diocese or within the <a href="https://www.britannica.com/place/Mainz">Electorate of Mainz</a>, 
but were also members of many other cathedral chapters and active in the <a href="https://www.britannica.com/topic/Diet-German-government">Perpetual Diet</a>, depending on their family backgrounds and personal skills, but also on health and coincidences. Their cross-border mobility dynamizes the Holy Roman Empire and counters any notion of the Empire as a rigid entity that can be depicted in a few maps with 
clearly-drawn boundaries; the cathedral provosts of Mainz exemplify on a small scale what was (most likely) true of all elites of the Roman-German Empire.</p>

<p align="justify">The availabilty of early modern sources is, of course, only comparatively high when constrated with the Middle Ages: Researching the individual biographies of the cathedral provosts from Mainz was a time-consuming process during which many new insights could be gained, but questions and problems arose that had to be answered and solved. Literature on the individual cathedral chapters and dioceses, biographies of individual persons associated with the cathedral chapters, collections of inscriptions, university enrollment lists, and various other research works were consulted. Moreover, we also analysed early modern material first-hand, e.g. by examining the printed <a href="https://www.dilibri.de/1408118">Mainz state calendars</a> or by sending inquiries to archives. Despite our efforts, we could only determine approximate dates for some events or were not able to find exact locations; sometimes only a <em>terminus post quem</em> or <em>ante quem</em> could be defined. When several dates were available for a single event or when it was not possible to base decisions on original sources, the quantity and quality of the available data had to be weighed carefully.</p>

<p align="justify">Following our research work, we created an <a href="https://ieg-dhr.github.io/DigiKAR_Projektseminar/interactive-map_EN.html">interactive map</a> as well as several <a href="https://ieg-dhr.github.io/DigiKAR_Projektseminar/static-maps_DE.html">static maps</a> highlighting different data aspects. For the sake of better comprehension, each map has a short description that briefly explains the epistemic interest, the represented provosts, and the most important graphic symbols.</p>

<hr>

<p>Lukas Theobald, August 2022</p>
<p>Translation: Monika Barget</p>
